After grunting so
much in the previous exercise,
you're probably totally out of breath.
Take a big gulp of air, relax, and
slowly let it out, and
let's get started on Gulp.
As you went through the Grunt exercise
you realized that configuring a Grunt
file is not as straightforward as you
might expect, and I'm not surprised.
It is in art in itself and
there our experts who have figured
out the way of making use of
Grunt to get the work done.
Very often we would be making use
of pre-configured grunt files that
the experts in the field have already
configured for us to get our work done.
But I still wanted you to get some
hands-on experience of configuring your
own Grant file, and then looking
at what it takes to configure one.
Of course, as you gain more
experience it will get more and
more easy to understand how
to configure these files.
Now, Grant was all about configuration.
Now, Gulp is another task runner
which takes the code route,
rather than the configuration route.
So in Gulp we write a lot of
code to get our task done,
rather than configuring
either the built in tasks or
the modules that we import,
just like that we did in Grunt.
So in Gulp you would notice
a different way of thinking about
implementing solutions for your tasks.
Gulp is based around Node.js streams and
it uses the Node.js streams
to build complex pipelines,
and this avoids creation
of intermediate files.
Now in Grunt, when you needed to process
some files, you would process a bunch of
files using one of the Grunt modules, and
then you'd produce some temporary files.
These temporary files would then be read
by other Grunt modules and then processed.
Then they would generate temporary
files until you get your work done, but
Gulp's way of doing this is to
take advantage of Node.js streams.
What is a Node.js stream?
Going into the details is
beyond this course, but
suffice it to say that a Node.js
stream is like a file flowing in.
So, think of the concept of a stream,
something that flows in.
So, the contents of a file flow
in Into one of the Gulp tasks.
It gets processed and
then a stream of file is upward and
that can be fed into the next
function in Gulp and
then so
on until you achieve the desired result.
I will explain a little more about
this in one of the next slides.
Now, in Gulp,
the plugins that are designed in Gulp
are designed to do only one task,
and do that one task very well.
So in order to achieve a complicated task,
you would actually take a bunch of
plugins and then hook them together
just like Lego blocks in order
to build a bigger pipeline.
And you will introduce
files from one end and
out the other end comes
the processed output.
In Gulp, tasks are executed
with the maximum concurrency.
So if you specify multiple
tasks to be executed,
Gulp will try to execute them
simultaneously as far as possible.
How do we get started with Gulp?
First, we will install
the global Gulp package.
The Command Line Tool, so
to do that we do npm install -g gulp.
Again, if you're using Mac or
Linux, make sure to use sudo,
then after that you will be installing
Gulp Package locally within your project.
Again, you do npm install gulp --save-dev,
just like you did before.
So we need to configure out
package.json file so that the Gulp
plugins that you installed
will be written into
the packaged.json file for
later installation if required.
In gulp, you will specify
the tasks inside gulp file.js.
Now, the gulp file.js requires you,
before you configure the gulp task you
need to install some gulp plugins.
Again, we make use of the npm install.
So we're going to install
a whole set of gulp plugins
which have similar functionality to
what we did with the gulp plugin.
So you will have jshint, jshint-stylish,
imagemmin, concat, uglify,
minify, usemin and
many other gulp plugins.
So, here I have a list of gulp
plugins that I'm going to make use of
in the exercise next.
So do install them.
So npm install and specify all
the gulp plugins in one shot and
then do --save-dev, so
that all this Gulpfile information is
also saved in your package.js file.
Then, we go into the gulpfile.js file.
The first thing that we do is
to load in all the plugins.
The way you load in plugins is
to say var gulp = require and
the specify the gulp plugin's name.
You can also use node packages and
node modules within your gulp file.
Some of the functionality
is directly used from
existing node modules rather than
writing explicit gulp plugins.
We will see a few of them as
we go through this lecture.
So, all the gulp plugins
are loaded in by using var and
then specifying the different plugins
using the require function there.
Another way of loading in all the plugins
that are part of your project
is to use a plugin called
the gulp load plugins package.
I am not going to use that
route in this exercise.
Instead, I will leave that as an optional
exercise for your to pursue further.
In grunt, I showed you the user
get grunt like that the gulp
load plugins plugin also
serves a similar purpose here.
Instead, what I am doing here is
to load the individual plugins
explicitly by using the require function.
As I mentioned,
at the start of this lecture
Gulp operates using node streams.
So the way a pipeline is
configured is that you would start
with a bunch of files then you
will pass them through a pipe.
And then in between they will be modified
using one function then the result
coming out of it will again be
piped through to the next function.
If you have used Unix, Unix or
Linux or even Mac, you know how
the pipe command works in Unix.
So you have a vertical line so
that you can take the output
from one command and then
pipe it directly into another command,
if you are using the terminal vendor.
Similar idea here with the gulp buckets.
So, each function will transform
the incoming file data from the pipe and
then output the transformed data
in the form of an outgoing pipe,
so the plugins are all connected
together using pipes, and
you're feeding the files from one end, and
the result comes out at the other end.
So that is why I show you a diagrammatic
illustration of the gulp plugin operation.
Now when you need to
specify the input files,
you will use a gulp source function.
This gulp source function
takes file globs,
you know what file globs
are from the previous lectures.
So they take file globs and
then, using the file glob,
they'll select a bunch of files, and
then these files will be inserted
into the pipe and the pipe, when it
passes through one of the functions.
So you specify the functions that need
to be performed on this stream of files,
are using the pipe command.
We will see some examples
in the next few slides.
And then finally, the end result with the
version of using the gulp dest function.
So this specifies the destination
of the modified false.
Let's look at some examples of
the usage in the next few slides.
First let me illustrate to you how
a JSHint task can be configured in Gulp.
Remember that this was one of the first
tasks that we saw even with Grunt.
So in, in Gulp's way of
specifying the JSHint task,
you would specify task gulp.task.
And then the first parameter to gulp.task
function is the name of the task.
So in this case I am using
JSHint is the name of the task.
The second one is a function.
Inside this function,
note how we have specified several things.
The first statement says gulp.src.
and you see that file glob
pattern that I had given there.
So this Gulp source will select
all the JavaScript files
in the app/scripts folder.
And then all these files are then going
to be piped through the jshint function.
That's why you see the second statement
where it says pipe, JSHint, and
the result from the JSHint function, the
output from the JSHint will be piped into
the JSHint reporter,
with the stylish option, so
the error or the warnings coming in from
JSHint will be printed out on the screen,
using the stylish reporter.
Again, same functionality
that we have seen in grunt.
Look at how gulp configures
that particular task.
The next task that you're gonna see,
which we didn't do with grunt but
I want to illustrate how this can be
done using gulp is Imagemin task.
The Imagemin task takes all
the images in your images folder, and
then optimizes these files for
use on your website.
So what we do is the gulp
source as you can see
we are specifying that files
in the app images folder.
Now, all these files are gonna
be first piped through a cache.
The cache can probably hold all the files,
and then one by one,
the files are passed through the Imagemin
function.
The Imagemin function we have given
certain configuration values there,
so optimization level three,
progressive is true, interlaced is true.
So these image transformations
are done to those images.
And then the result will be
piped out to the destination,
which is distribution/images.
So we are slowly building the distribution
folder with the files from the source
folder, the source folder is still
the app folder that we had used earlier.
Then, you also see me using another
function called the notify function.
The notify function will display the
message that we give as a parameter there
to the user, using your standard
operating system to notify functionality.
So it will display a notify message on
the screen when the task is completed.
The next task that we are going
to look at is the clean-up task.
Now I'm gonna use
the clean-up task to remove
all the files from the distribution folder
and the deleted distribution folder.
So to do this we are taking
the help of a node module
called D-E-L, del, so
this is not a gulp plugin.
Instead, this is a module
that node already provides.
So we are taking advantage of the node
module directly in order to achieve our
required functionality.
So I can figure this gulp.task
as saying gulp.task,
and then specifically the name as clean,
and then send the function.
I am specifying del, and
then the parameter there is desk folder,
which is being supplied.
So this will result in the del
module being executive, and
which will result in the distribution
folder being deleted from your project.
The next task we are going to
look at is the usemin task.
Remember we used a similar usemin
task in grant which we configured.
Now, in case of gulp,as you see,
this is a streaming way of doing things.
So, I configure the gulp task with usemin.
And also note the second value there.
Inside square brackets,
I'm specifying jshint.
What this means is that before the usemin
task is run, I should run the jshint task.
So in principle, I don't need to
explicitly specify the JS sync task.
Whenever the usemin task runs,
before the usemin task actually runs
it will run the JS sync task also.
This is one way of checking
the JavaScript files before you go to
the Concatenation and magnification.
For the CSS files, you're gonna do
the minification and the revisioning.
So, here, I am specifying gulp.src.
Recall for the usemin task,
we are going to configure the information
inside the HTML file where
we use the build colon CSS.
And the destination file name and
then the end belt.
Remember that we included
some comments inside the menu
HTML page for the earlier grant exercise.
They're going to make use of
the same menu HTML file so
the usemin that we are using with gulp
works with the same menu.html file.
Now since we have already
configured that in our app folder,
I'm not gonna repeat that
in the Gulp exercise.
That is taken as the source so
from the configuration there we're gonna
identify which of the CSS files and
which of the JavaScript files that
are being used in this project.
Then, that is piped through
the usemin function.
The usemin function
itself does the cssmin,
then the JavaScript uglification and
all them.
So, I am specifying the usemin task.
I'm saying for CSS do the minifycss() and
you can see that I have specified rev().
That is the file revisioning
that we used with grant.
Same thing is provided by
the Rev plugin for gulp.
And after that, also for,
we'll carry out similar
uglification and concatenation for
the JavaScript files.
That is specified the uglify and
the Rev and the destination of
this function is that
distribution folder so
all the results are going to be
copied into the distribution folder
including the HTML files.
Another interesting package
that we're going to use
with Gulp is called a browser-sync.
Browser-sync is a node package which
enables you to start a browser and
sever a static that fold so
it only serves a static web assets,
static web page and
static CS java system first so
to configure this
browser sync task now remember
browser sync e is an m p m module
not a gulp plugin now a similar
browser sync module is
also available with Grant.
So instead of using the connect
that we used with Grant.
You can also use browser sync with Grant.
The configuration is somewhat similar, but
a little bit different than
the connect package the same way.
Gulp also has a connect package, but
I wanted to illustrate to
you the use of BrowserSync.
I illustrated the connect module for
grunt, so I thought I would illustrate
the BrowserSync module for gulp.
So browser sync as far as I came to know,
is more flexible or
more powerful than connect flow.
By all means,
you can reconfigure the grunt file,
to use browser settings
instead of using connect.
Now let's look at how we can
figure browser sync in gulp.
So here we specify the gulp
task as browser sync.
This gulp task browser sync the second
value that I specify inside
the square brackets is 'default'.
There is a default task that
I'm going to configure later.
What I am specifying is that,
before I run browserSync,
I should first execute the default task.
The default task does the building
of the distribution folder.
As you will see a little bit later.
Now the browser sync task, the first var
files equal to what I am specifying,
what I am specifying to the browser sync
task is that these are all the files
that you're going to keep a watch on and
any one of them if they change
you are going to be causing
the browser window to be reloaded.
The second thing that you see
there is the browserSync.init.
So I am specifying configuration for
the browserSync module.
So I specify the first
parameter of those files,
which is the JavaScript variable
that I just declared earlier.
Then the second parameter
specifies some information about
the server configuration.
I'm specifying that the server
should use the distribution folder
as the best directory for the server.
So files in the distribution
folder will be served up.
And the second parameter there,
index which I specify as menu.html.
I am specifying to gulp
to browser sync that.
The default index.html file
is not available there.
Instead use the menu or html file
as the index file to be summed up.
If you don't specify the index explicitly,
BrowserSync automatically assumes
there is an index or HTML folder
dist then it will start serving
up that particular file.
The last configuration down below that
you see, I'm specifying gulp.watch,
gulp.watch is a built-in task in gulp.
What the watch task does,
is it keeps watch on the files
specified as a parameter to it.
So, inside they're watch task I'm
specifying dist as their parameter and
also I am specifying on the function
on and then I'm saying change.
If there is any change in any of
the files inside the distribution folder.
Then the browser sync reload will
be called to reload the browser, so
this ensures that if you make changes to
any of the files in the app folder, then
the default task will cause a rebuilding
of your distribution folder.
When your distribution folder is rebuilt,
then the files in the distribution
folder will change.
This will result in the gulp
watch here getting triggered and
this will cause the processing
to reload the pitch.
In addition, just like in case of grunt,
we had the watch task.
We can also configure
a watch task in gulp.
So for the watch task in gulp I
am specifying gulp task watch and
note that I'm specifying the second
parameter there with the browser sync.
Within the square brackets,
meaning that the watch task
depends upon the BrowserSync task
to execute before the watch task.
Now, this way, if I say gulp watch,
then this will automatically cause
the watch tasks that I have configured
inside the function here to be started up,
and they're going to keep a watch on
the files that are specified there.
And so I am specifying gulp.watch and
then look at the file globs
that I've specified there.
I'm saying keep a watch
on the scripts folder,
the styles folder,
the html files in the folder.
When any one of them changes, rate on
the usemin task if the images change,
then you're going to realign
the imagemin task, in this case.
Finally, let me show you
the default task that I configured.
By default Gulp provides this
default task that you can configure.
So if you give the name of the task as
default, then you can simply execute
this task by just typing
gulp at the command prompt.
The default task here,
again I'm specifying a dependency for
the default task on the clean task.
So which means that before the default
executes, the clean task will execute.
Now remember that gulp will execute all
the tasks that you specify
asynchronously and simultaneously.
Now if I do the clean while I am doing
usemin and imagemin and copyfonts,
it is quite possible that the clean task
may end up deleting some of the files.
That my remaining tasks may create.
So in order to prevent
the kind of behavior,
what I am specifying is that
the clean task is the dependency.
The clean task should be
execute first to completion,
then you go about executing
the remaining task.
Here, I am taking the help of a Gulp
start function that is available.
And inside the gulp start function,
I am specifying all the tasks
that are supposed to execute.
They could be executed
sequentially of all concurrently.
It doesn't matter to us.
These tasks are not
dependent upon each other.
The copyfonts task copies
the font files from
the browser contents fonts folders
to the distribution folder.
Finally, they come to our next exercise.
We are going to take all
the tasks that we just studied,
and then configure a Gulp file.
And then we're gonna use Gulp to do
exactly the same thing that we were
doing using Grunt before.
Now so at the end of this exercise,
hopefully you will have
learned something about
how to make use of Gulp for
doing your task runners.
Now Grunt is based around Node.js strings.
Sorry.